Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the chemical control of ventilation. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the chemical control of ventilation in overview.
The chemical control of ventilation is the system by which the chemoreceptors sense
the carbon dioxide, oxygen and acidity of the blood and cerebrospinal fluid,
and adjust ventilation to keep them within narrow limits — the principal feedback
regulating breathing.
The dominant controlled variable in health is the arterial carbon dioxide,
which is held remarkably constant; the system is exquisitely sensitive to it.
There are two sets of chemoreceptors.
The central chemoreceptors, in the medulla,
respond chiefly to the carbon dioxide and the resulting acidity of the
cerebrospinal fluid, and provide the major part of the drive to breathe and the
response to carbon dioxide.
The peripheral chemoreceptors, in the carotid and aortic bodies,
respond to a low arterial oxygen, and also to carbon dioxide and acidity,
and provide the rapid response and the hypoxic drive.
These act on the respiratory centres to adjust ventilation by negative feedback:
a rise in carbon dioxide or fall in oxygen increases ventilation,
restoring the gases.
So the chemical control of ventilation uses central chemoreceptors,
responding mainly to carbon dioxide and cerebrospinal-fluid acidity and giving the
major carbon-dioxide drive, and peripheral chemoreceptors in the carotid and aortic
bodies, responding to a low oxygen and also to carbon dioxide and acidity;
together adjusting ventilation by negative feedback to hold the arterial carbon
dioxide constant — the principal regulation of breathing.
Describe the central chemoreceptors and their stimulus.
The central chemoreceptors are the principal sensors driving ventilation in
response to carbon dioxide, and they work in an indirect but elegant way,
responding to the acidity of the cerebrospinal fluid rather than to carbon dioxide
directly.
They lie near the ventral surface of the medulla,
separate from the respiratory centres,
bathed in the cerebrospinal fluid and brain extracellular fluid.
Their effective stimulus is the hydrogen ion concentration — the acidity — of the
cerebrospinal fluid around them.
The link to carbon dioxide is as follows: carbon dioxide, being lipid-soluble,
crosses the blood-brain barrier freely from the blood into the cerebrospinal fluid,
where it reacts with water to form carbonic acid and so hydrogen ions,
lowering the pH; the chemoreceptors sense this fall in pH and increase ventilation.
Because the cerebrospinal fluid has little protein and so little buffering,
its pH changes more for a given change in carbon dioxide than the blood does,
making the response sensitive.
Hydrogen ions in the blood, by contrast, cross the barrier poorly,
so the central receptors respond to carbon dioxide, not directly to blood acidity.
So the central chemoreceptors, near the ventral medulla,
sense the hydrogen ion concentration of the cerebrospinal fluid;
blood carbon dioxide crosses the blood-brain barrier and acidifies the
poorly-buffered cerebrospinal fluid,
stimulating them to increase ventilation — the major mechanism of the
carbon-dioxide drive, responding to carbon dioxide indirectly through
cerebrospinal-fluid pH.
Describe the peripheral chemoreceptors.
The peripheral chemoreceptors are the sensors responsible for the rapid response to
changes in the blood gases and, crucially, for the ventilatory response to hypoxia,
which the central chemoreceptors do not provide.
They are located in the carotid bodies,
at the bifurcation of the common carotid arteries, and in the aortic bodies,
near the aortic arch; the carotid bodies are the more important in humans for the
control of ventilation.
They are small, highly vascular structures with an extremely high blood flow
relative to their size, sensing the arterial blood directly.
Their afferents travel, from the carotid bodies in the glossopharyngeal nerve and
from the aortic bodies in the vagus, to the medulla.
Their effective stimuli are a fall in the arterial oxygen partial pressure — to
which they are the sole responders,
their discharge increasing steeply as oxygen falls to low levels — and also a rise
in carbon dioxide and in hydrogen ion concentration, and a fall in blood flow.
They thus provide the hypoxic ventilatory drive and a rapid component of the
carbon-dioxide and acid response.
So the peripheral chemoreceptors, in the carotid and aortic bodies, are small,
highly vascular structures sensing the arterial blood,
signalling via the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves;
they respond to a fall in arterial oxygen — providing the sole hypoxic drive — and
also to a rise in carbon dioxide and acidity,
giving the rapid response — the complement to the central chemoreceptors.
Describe the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide.
The ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is the most important and sensitive of
the chemical responses, and it is described by the carbon dioxide response curve,
which plots the minute ventilation against the arterial, or alveolar,
carbon dioxide tension.
The curve is essentially linear over the physiological range:
as the arterial carbon dioxide rises,
the ventilation increases in a straight-line fashion,
and the slope of this line — the increase in ventilation per unit rise in carbon
dioxide — expresses the sensitivity of the response, which is steep,
so that the ventilation is normally held tightly.
Extrapolated back, the line meets the carbon-dioxide axis at a threshold below
which there is no ventilation — the apnoeic threshold.
At very high carbon dioxide levels,
the response declines as carbon dioxide narcosis supervenes.
The response is mediated mainly by the central chemoreceptors,
with a rapid peripheral component.
It is reduced — the curve shifted right and its slope reduced — by sleep,
by anaesthetic and sedative agents, and by opioids,
and is blunted in chronic carbon dioxide retention;
it is increased by a low oxygen and by acidosis.
So the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is a steep,
near-linear rise in ventilation with arterial carbon dioxide,
its slope expressing the sensitivity,
with an apnoeic threshold below which breathing ceases; mediated mainly centrally,
and depressed by sleep, anaesthesia and opioids and potentiated by hypoxia — the
dominant chemical control of breathing, and one blunted by the drugs of anaesthesia.
Describe the ventilatory response to hypoxia.
The ventilatory response to hypoxia is the increase in ventilation caused by a fall
in the arterial oxygen, mediated entirely by the peripheral chemoreceptors,
and it is described by the hypoxic response curve,
which has a characteristic non-linear shape quite different from the carbon-dioxide
response.
The curve plots ventilation against the arterial oxygen partial pressure.
Its shape is hyperbolic, or roughly so: at a normal and high arterial oxygen,
there is little or no stimulation, and lowering the oxygen modestly has little
effect; only when the arterial oxygen falls to lower levels — below around eight
kilopascals, or sixty millimetres of mercury — does the ventilation begin to rise
steeply, increasing greatly as the oxygen falls further.
This means the hypoxic drive is a late, emergency response,
contributing little to normal control but becoming powerful in significant hypoxia.
The response is potentiated by a concurrent high carbon dioxide and is steeper then.
It is, importantly, very sensitive to depression by anaesthetic agents,
being abolished by even subanaesthetic concentrations.
So the ventilatory response to hypoxia, mediated by the peripheral chemoreceptors,
is non-linear and hyperbolic: little response until the arterial oxygen falls below
about eight kilopascals, then a steep rise; a late, emergency drive,
potentiated by carbon dioxide and profoundly depressed by anaesthetic agents — a
response of particular concern in anaesthesia, where it is readily lost.
How do carbon dioxide and oxygen interact in the control of ventilation?
The responses to carbon dioxide and to oxygen do not act in isolation but interact,
each potentiating the other, so that the ventilatory response to one depends on the
level of the other — an interaction that makes the control more effective in
combined disturbances.
The key features are these. A low oxygen potentiates the response to carbon
dioxide: in hypoxia, the carbon dioxide response curve becomes steeper and is
shifted, so that for any given carbon dioxide the ventilation is greater — the two
stimuli being more than additive.
Conversely, a high carbon dioxide, or acidosis,
potentiates the response to hypoxia, making the hypoxic response curve steeper.
This mutual potentiation occurs largely at the peripheral chemoreceptors,
which sense both.
The practical consequences are important: in asphyxia,
where carbon dioxide rises and oxygen falls together,
the combined drive is very powerful;
and the interaction must be considered when interpreting the control in disease.
So carbon dioxide and oxygen interact synergistically in the control of
ventilation: hypoxia steepens the carbon-dioxide response,
and hypercapnia or acidosis steepens the hypoxic response,
the effects being more than additive and mediated largely at the peripheral
chemoreceptors — an interaction making the combined response to asphyxia powerful,
and one relevant to the interpretation of ventilatory control.
Pull it together: how does the chemical control maintain the blood gases?
I would draw it together around the chemical control as a negative-feedback system
whose overriding purpose is to hold the arterial carbon dioxide constant,
with a protective hypoxic drive in reserve.
The central chemoreceptors, sensing the carbon dioxide indirectly through the pH of
the cerebrospinal fluid, provide the major, steep,
near-linear response to carbon dioxide,
continuously adjusting ventilation to hold the arterial carbon dioxide within a
narrow range — the dominant control in health.
The peripheral chemoreceptors add a rapid component to this carbon-dioxide and acid
response, and, uniquely, provide the hypoxic ventilatory drive,
which is a non-linear, late, emergency response,
becoming powerful only when the arterial oxygen falls substantially.
The two stimuli interact synergistically. The system thus keeps the carbon dioxide
tightly controlled moment to moment,
while standing ready to defend the oxygen in hypoxia.
Anaesthesia depresses both, especially the hypoxic drive.
So the chemical control maintains the blood gases by a dominant,
sensitive central response to carbon dioxide through cerebrospinal-fluid pH,
holding the carbon dioxide constant,
with a peripheral hypoxic drive in reserve for significant hypoxia,
the two interacting synergistically;
an integrated feedback defending the blood gases,
profoundly depressed by anaesthesia,
which is the foundation of the chemical regulation of breathing.
Describe the cellular mechanism of the carotid body.
The carotid body transduces the level of oxygen, and of carbon dioxide and acidity,
in the arterial blood into a nerve signal,
and the cellular mechanism by which it senses these, particularly oxygen,
is a subject of much study, centring on its specialised glomus cells.
The carotid body contains type one, or glomus, cells, which are the sensing cells,
in synaptic contact with the afferent nerve endings, and supporting type two cells.
The glomus cells are chemosensitive: a fall in arterial oxygen,
or a rise in carbon dioxide or hydrogen ions, leads,
through oxygen-sensitive potassium channels and other mechanisms,
to depolarisation of the glomus cell and the entry of calcium,
triggering the release of neurotransmitters — such as dopamine,
acetylcholine and adenosine triphosphate — which excite the afferent nerve endings,
increasing the discharge to the medulla.
The carotid body's extraordinarily high blood flow relative to its small size
ensures that it samples arterial blood with minimal extraction,
so it senses the arterial, not venous, levels.
So the carotid body senses the blood gases through its glomus cells,
in which a fall in oxygen or rise in carbon dioxide or acidity,
acting through oxygen-sensitive channels, causes depolarisation,
calcium entry and neurotransmitter release, exciting the afferent nerve;
its very high blood flow ensuring it samples arterial blood — the cellular basis of
peripheral chemoreception, especially of oxygen.
Describe the ventilatory response to a metabolic acidosis.
A metabolic acidosis stimulates ventilation,
producing a characteristic deep breathing,
and this is the respiratory compensation for the acidosis,
an important illustration of the chemical control responding to acidity.
When a metabolic acidosis develops — from the accumulation of fixed acid,
as in diabetic ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis or renal failure — the fall in the
arterial pH is sensed by the chemoreceptors.
The peripheral chemoreceptors, the carotid bodies,
respond directly and rapidly to the rise in arterial hydrogen ion concentration,
increasing ventilation; this is the principal route,
since hydrogen ions cross the blood-brain barrier poorly,
so the central chemoreceptors are not directly stimulated by the blood acidosis at
first, though as the increased ventilation lowers the carbon dioxide,
and as hydrogen ions slowly affect the cerebrospinal fluid,
the central response adjusts.
The increased ventilation blows off carbon dioxide,
lowering it and so raising the pH back towards normal — the respiratory
compensation. When severe, this produces the deep,
sighing breathing known as Kussmaul respiration.
So a metabolic acidosis stimulates ventilation chiefly through the peripheral
chemoreceptors responding to the raised arterial hydrogen ion concentration,
increasing ventilation to blow off carbon dioxide and raise the pH — the
respiratory compensation; producing, when severe,
the deep Kussmaul breathing — a clear demonstration of the chemoreceptor response
to acidity.
How is the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide measured?
The ventilatory response to carbon dioxide,
expressed by the slope of the carbon dioxide response curve,
can be measured to assess the sensitivity of the chemical control,
and there are two principal methods,
of which the rebreathing method is the more convenient.
In the steady-state method, the subject breathes gas mixtures with different fixed
concentrations of carbon dioxide, and at each, once a steady state is reached,
the ventilation and the carbon dioxide are measured;
plotting these gives the response curve and its slope.
This is accurate but slow.
The rebreathing method, devised by Read, is quicker:
the subject rebreathes from a bag containing a high oxygen and some carbon dioxide;
as they rebreathe, the carbon dioxide in the bag and the body rises steadily and
uniformly, while the high oxygen prevents a hypoxic drive,
and the ventilation is recorded against the rising carbon dioxide,
generating the response curve in a few minutes.
The high oxygen ensures the response measured is the carbon-dioxide response
uncomplicated by hypoxia.
So the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is measured either by the
steady-state method, breathing fixed carbon-dioxide mixtures, or,
more conveniently, by Read's rebreathing method,
rebreathing from a bag of high oxygen and carbon dioxide so that the carbon dioxide
rises steadily without a hypoxic drive;
both yielding the response curve whose slope gives the sensitivity — a measure of
the chemical control.
Explain the role of cerebrospinal fluid bicarbonate in the adaptation to chronic
carbon dioxide changes.
The bicarbonate of the cerebrospinal fluid plays a key role in the adaptation of
the central chemoreceptors to sustained changes in carbon dioxide,
explaining why the response to a chronic change differs from that to an acute one.
The central chemoreceptors respond to the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid,
which is determined, by the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship,
by the ratio of bicarbonate to carbon dioxide in that fluid.
Acutely, a rise in carbon dioxide acidifies the cerebrospinal fluid and stimulates
ventilation strongly, because the cerebrospinal fluid is poorly buffered.
But if the carbon dioxide remains elevated,
the bicarbonate of the cerebrospinal fluid is gradually adjusted:
bicarbonate is transported across the blood-brain barrier and the choroid plexus
into the cerebrospinal fluid, raising it and so restoring the ratio and the pH of
the cerebrospinal fluid towards normal over a day or two.
As the cerebrospinal-fluid pH normalises, the chemoreceptor stimulus wanes,
so the ventilatory drive falls despite the persisting high carbon dioxide.
The reverse occurs at altitude, where bicarbonate is reduced to compensate the
alkalosis.
So the cerebrospinal-fluid bicarbonate is actively adjusted to restore the
cerebrospinal-fluid pH during sustained carbon-dioxide changes — rising to buffer a
chronic hypercapnia and falling in chronic hypocapnia at altitude — so that the
central chemoreceptor drive adapts to the chronic level;
the basis of the differing acute and chronic responses to carbon dioxide.
Describe the apnoeic threshold and post-hyperventilation apnoea.
The apnoeic threshold is the level of arterial carbon dioxide below which the
stimulus to breathe is lost and apnoea ensues,
and it explains the phenomenon of post-hyperventilation apnoea,
of relevance to anaesthesia and to the control of breathing.
The carbon dioxide response curve, extrapolated downward,
meets the carbon-dioxide axis at a positive value — the apnoeic threshold —
indicating that if the carbon dioxide is lowered below this point,
the chemical drive to breathe disappears and breathing stops.
In the awake state, the wakefulness drive maintains some breathing even below this
threshold, so a conscious person who hyperventilates does not become apnoeic,
merely feeling the reduced urge.
But when the wakefulness drive is removed — in sleep,
sedation or anaesthesia — lowering the carbon dioxide below the apnoeic threshold,
as by a period of hyperventilation or by over-vigorous mechanical ventilation,
causes apnoea until the carbon dioxide rises again above the threshold.
This is post-hyperventilation apnoea,
and it is why a patient may be apnoeic after being hyperventilated under
anaesthesia.
So the apnoeic threshold is the carbon-dioxide level below which the chemical drive
to breathe is lost; the wakefulness drive masks it when awake,
but under anaesthesia or in sleep, lowering the carbon dioxide below it — by
hyperventilation — causes post-hyperventilation apnoea until the carbon dioxide
rises — a phenomenon of practical importance in anaesthesia.
Describe carbon dioxide narcosis.
Carbon dioxide narcosis is the depression of consciousness,
and ultimately of the brain, caused by a very high arterial carbon dioxide,
and it represents the failure, at extreme levels,
of the otherwise stimulant effect of carbon dioxide on the brain.
Over the normal and moderately raised range,
carbon dioxide stimulates ventilation and increases arousal;
but as the arterial carbon dioxide rises to very high levels,
it begins to depress the central nervous system, causing confusion, drowsiness,
headache — partly from the cerebral vasodilatation and raised intracranial pressure
— and, at extreme levels, unconsciousness and coma, the narcosis.
The mechanism involves the marked fall in intracellular and cerebrospinal-fluid pH
and direct narcotic effects of the high carbon dioxide on neurons.
A particular danger arises in the chronically hypercapnic patient who has come to
depend on a hypoxic drive: if given a high concentration of oxygen incautiously,
the relief of the hypoxic drive may reduce their ventilation,
allowing the carbon dioxide to climb further into the narcotic range.
So carbon dioxide narcosis is the depression of consciousness by a very high
arterial carbon dioxide, which at extreme levels depresses rather than stimulates
the brain — through the fall in pH and direct effects — causing confusion,
drowsiness and coma; a particular risk in the chronically hypercapnic patient given
too much oxygen, and a reason for the careful titration of oxygen in such patients.
Describe in detail the effect of anaesthetic agents on the hypoxic ventilatory
response.
The hypoxic ventilatory response is peculiarly sensitive to depression by the
anaesthetic agents, being abolished at concentrations far below those needed for
anaesthesia, and this is one of the most clinically important effects of
anaesthesia on the control of breathing.
The hypoxic ventilatory response, mediated by the peripheral chemoreceptors,
is the protective drive that increases ventilation when the arterial oxygen falls;
it is the body's defence against hypoxia.
The volatile anaesthetic agents depress this response markedly,
and — crucially — they do so at low, subanaesthetic concentrations,
such as those remaining during recovery from anaesthesia,
so that even a patient apparently waking may have a depressed hypoxic drive.
The mechanism is thought to involve an action at the carotid body and its central
connections.
The practical consequence is grave: a patient in the recovery period,
with a residual subanaesthetic concentration of agent, and perhaps with opioids,
may fail to mount the normal ventilatory response to hypoxia,
so that hypoxaemia is not corrected by increased breathing — a reason for
supplemental oxygen and monitoring in recovery.
So the anaesthetic agents, particularly the volatiles,
depress the hypoxic ventilatory response profoundly and at subanaesthetic
concentrations, by an action on the peripheral chemoreceptor pathway,
removing the protective drive to breathe in response to hypoxia even during
recovery — a major reason for supplemental oxygen and vigilance in the
postoperative period.
Describe the wakefulness drive and the behavioural influences on the chemical
control.
The chemical control does not operate in isolation but is supplemented by a
wakefulness drive and modified by behavioural influences,
and the loss of the wakefulness drive is particularly important in understanding
breathing in sleep and anaesthesia.
The wakefulness drive is a tonic, non-chemical excitatory input to the respiratory
centres present in the awake state,
arising from the activity of the ascending arousal systems;
it provides a background drive to breathe that is independent of the chemical
stimuli.
Its significance is shown by the apnoeic threshold: when awake,
this wakefulness drive keeps a person breathing even if the carbon dioxide is
lowered below the chemical threshold,
so they do not become apnoeic on hyperventilating; but when it is lost,
in sleep or anaesthesia, breathing becomes wholly dependent on the chemical drive,
and falls or ceases if the carbon dioxide is low.
Behavioural and emotional influences, from the cortex and limbic system,
also modify breathing — with arousal, emotion,
pain and anticipation — independent of the chemical state.
So the wakefulness drive is a tonic,
non-chemical excitatory input to breathing present when awake,
which maintains ventilation even below the chemical apnoeic threshold;
its loss in sleep and anaesthesia leaving breathing dependent on the chemical
drive, while behavioural and emotional influences further modify breathing — inputs
supplementing the chemical control, of importance in sleep and anaesthesia.
Compare the carotid and aortic bodies and describe the cardiovascular chemoreflex.
The carotid and aortic bodies are the two sets of peripheral chemoreceptors,
similar but differing in connections and importance,
and their stimulation produces cardiovascular as well as ventilatory effects.
The carotid bodies, at the carotid bifurcation,
signal via the glossopharyngeal nerve and are the more important for the control of
ventilation in humans; the aortic bodies, near the aortic arch,
signal via the vagus and are relatively more concerned with cardiovascular reflexes.
Both respond to a fall in arterial oxygen and to a rise in carbon dioxide and
acidity. The primary, ventilatory chemoreflex increases breathing.
But the chemoreceptors also evoke a cardiovascular chemoreflex: stimulation tends,
by the direct reflex, to cause bradycardia and vasoconstriction — an
oxygen-conserving response — though in the intact animal this is usually overridden
by the secondary effects of the increased breathing, which cause tachycardia.
The cardiovascular chemoreflex becomes prominent when breathing cannot increase,
as in apnoea or the diving response,
where chemoreceptor stimulation then produces a marked bradycardia and
vasoconstriction.
So the carotid bodies are the more important for ventilation and the aortic bodies
relatively more for cardiovascular reflexes;
both drive the ventilatory chemoreflex,
and also a cardiovascular chemoreflex of bradycardia and vasoconstriction,
which is usually masked by the effects of breathing but emerges in apnoea and
diving — an oxygen-conserving response.
Why do the peripheral chemoreceptors respond to oxygen tension rather than oxygen
content?
An important and instructive feature of the peripheral chemoreceptors is that they
respond to the partial pressure, or tension, of oxygen in the arterial blood,
not to its content or to the total amount delivered,
which explains why they are not stimulated by anaemia or carbon monoxide poisoning.
The chemoreceptor glomus cells sense the local oxygen tension in the blood
perfusing them.
Because the carotid body has an extraordinarily high blood flow relative to its
tiny metabolic needs, it extracts very little oxygen,
so the oxygen tension in the blood reaching its cells is essentially the arterial
tension, and the cells are stimulated only when that tension falls.
Now, in anaemia or carbon monoxide poisoning,
the oxygen content of the blood is greatly reduced — there is less haemoglobin,
or it is blocked — but the arterial oxygen tension, the dissolved oxygen,
is normal; so the chemoreceptors, sensing tension, are not stimulated,
and ventilation is not increased despite the dangerous reduction in oxygen delivery.
This is why these forms of hypoxia do not produce the breathlessness that hypoxic
hypoxia does.
So the peripheral chemoreceptors respond to arterial oxygen tension, not content,
because their high blood flow lets them sense the arterial tension;
consequently anaemia and carbon monoxide poisoning,
which lower the content but not the tension,
do not stimulate them or increase ventilation — explaining the lack of respiratory
response in these dangerous states.
Describe the carotid body response to reduced blood flow and to chronic hypoxia.
The carotid body's behaviour in reduced blood flow and its adaptation to chronic
hypoxia are both instructive, the former explaining its response in shock and the
latter its plasticity.
Because the carotid body senses the oxygen tension of the blood reaching it,
a marked reduction in its blood flow — as in severe hypotension or low cardiac
output — causes it to extract enough oxygen that the local tension falls even if
the arterial tension is normal, so the chemoreceptors are stimulated;
thus stagnant, circulatory states can stimulate the chemoreceptors and contribute
to the hyperventilation of shock.
In chronic hypoxia, as at altitude or in chronic lung disease,
the carotid body shows plasticity: it enlarges and its sensitivity changes —
initially the sustained hypoxia enhances the response,
contributing to ventilatory acclimatisation, though over very long periods,
as in the high-altitude native or the chronically hypoxaemic patient,
the hypoxic response may become blunted.
So the carotid body, sensing local oxygen tension,
is stimulated by a severe reduction in its blood flow, as in shock,
even with a normal arterial tension;
and in chronic hypoxia it shows plasticity — enlarging and initially increasing its
sensitivity to aid acclimatisation,
though becoming blunted over very long exposure — behaviours relevant to shock,
to acclimatisation, and to chronic respiratory disease.
Describe the respiratory stimulant drugs.
Respiratory stimulants, or analeptics,
are drugs that increase ventilation by stimulating the respiratory control,
and although their role is now limited,
they illustrate the pharmacology of the chemical control.
The principal example is doxapram, which acts chiefly on the peripheral
chemoreceptors, the carotid bodies, at low doses,
and on the central respiratory centres at higher doses,
increasing the respiratory rate and tidal volume and so ventilation;
it stimulates breathing without the general central stimulation and convulsant risk
of the older analeptics.
Its uses have been in the short-term stimulation of breathing — for instance in
postoperative respiratory depression,
or to stimulate breathing in some patients with respiratory failure as a
temporising measure — though it is little used now,
supplanted by mechanical ventilatory support, which is safer and more effective.
Caffeine and the methylxanthines are used as respiratory stimulants in the apnoea
of prematurity. Other agents, such as almitrine,
have been used to stimulate the chemoreceptors.
The limitations of stimulants are that they increase the work and oxygen cost of
breathing and can cause side effects,
and they cannot substitute for ventilation when the respiratory pump fails.
So respiratory stimulants such as doxapram increase ventilation by stimulating the
peripheral chemoreceptors and, at higher doses, the central centres;
used short-term for respiratory depression but now largely supplanted by
ventilatory support, with caffeine used for the apnoea of prematurity — a limited
pharmacology of the chemical control.
Describe the obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
The obesity hypoventilation syndrome is a disorder in which severe obesity is
accompanied by chronic alveolar hypoventilation,
with a raised carbon dioxide while awake,
and it results from a combination of the mechanical load of obesity and a blunting
of the ventilatory drive.
Obesity, as discussed, imposes a mechanical load that reduces compliance and
increases the work of breathing, and reduces the functional residual capacity.
In most obese people, the respiratory drive increases to compensate,
maintaining a normal carbon dioxide; but in the obesity hypoventilation syndrome,
this compensation fails — the ventilatory responses to carbon dioxide and hypoxia
are blunted, perhaps from a combination of the mechanical load,
the effects of associated sleep-disordered breathing, and altered control,
sometimes with a role for leptin resistance — so the patient hypoventilates and
retains carbon dioxide, with a chronic respiratory acidosis compensated by renal
bicarbonate retention.
It is commonly associated with obstructive sleep apnoea.
The chronic hypercapnia blunts the carbon-dioxide drive further,
and these patients may depend on a hypoxic drive,
with the attendant risk from incautious oxygen.
So the obesity hypoventilation syndrome is chronic awake hypoventilation with
hypercapnia in severe obesity, from the mechanical load combined with a blunted
ventilatory drive and associated sleep-disordered breathing;
giving a compensated respiratory acidosis and a blunted carbon-dioxide drive — a
condition of major anaesthetic relevance,
with risk from sedation and from incautious oxygen.
Describe the role of the chemoreflexes in obstructive sleep apnoea and the concept
of loop gain.
Obstructive sleep apnoea, the repetitive collapse of the pharynx during sleep,
interacts with the chemical control of breathing in ways that can perpetuate the
disorder, and the concept of loop gain captures the instability of the control
system that contributes to it.
In obstructive sleep apnoea, the upper airway repeatedly obstructs during sleep,
causing apnoeas with falling oxygen and rising carbon dioxide;
the resulting chemoreceptor stimulation,
together with the effort against the obstruction,
eventually causes an arousal that restores airway tone and breathing,
often with an overshoot of ventilation,
after which sleep resumes and the cycle repeats.
Loop gain is an engineering concept describing the tendency of the feedback control
of breathing to oscillate: it is the ratio of the ventilatory response to the
disturbance that provoked it.
A high loop gain — an exaggerated chemoreflex response,
or a long circulatory delay — makes the system unstable,
prone to overshoot and undershoot, promoting the cyclical apnoeas;
so a high loop gain contributes to both obstructive and central sleep apnoea by
destabilising the control.
So in obstructive sleep apnoea the chemoreflexes,
stimulated by the apnoeic falls in oxygen and rises in carbon dioxide,
drive the arousals and ventilatory overshoots that perpetuate the cycle;
and loop gain, the gain of the ventilatory feedback,
when high — from an exaggerated chemoreflex or long delay — destabilises breathing
and promotes the cyclical apnoeas — concepts linking the chemical control to
sleep-disordered breathing.
How can the sensitivity of the chemical control be assessed clinically?
The sensitivity of the chemical control of breathing — the responsiveness to carbon
dioxide and to hypoxia — can be assessed by tests that measure the ventilatory
response to a controlled chemical stimulus,
which are used in research and occasionally clinically to characterise the control.
The carbon-dioxide sensitivity is assessed by the carbon-dioxide response curve,
measured either by the steady-state method,
breathing fixed carbon-dioxide mixtures, or, more conveniently,
by Read's rebreathing method, in which the subject rebreathes from a bag of high
oxygen and carbon dioxide so the carbon dioxide rises steadily without a hypoxic
drive, and the ventilation is plotted against it; the slope gives the sensitivity.
The hypoxic sensitivity is assessed by lowering the inspired oxygen,
at a constant carbon dioxide, and measuring the rise in ventilation as the oxygen
falls. Simpler indices include the breath-holding time and the ventilatory pattern.
These assessments reveal a blunted response in chronic carbon-dioxide retention,
in the obesity hypoventilation syndrome, and with depressant drugs,
and a heightened response in some conditions.
So the chemical control's sensitivity is assessed by the carbon-dioxide response
curve — by steady-state or, conveniently,
Read's rebreathing method — and by the hypoxic response measured at constant carbon
dioxide; revealing the blunted responses of chronic carbon-dioxide retention,
obesity hypoventilation and depressant drugs — tests characterising the chemical
control in health and disease.
Summarise how the peripheral and central chemoreceptors are integrated in the
overall control.
I would summarise the integration by emphasising that the central and peripheral
chemoreceptors are complementary, with different stimuli, speeds and roles,
combined to give a control that holds the carbon dioxide constant while defending
the oxygen.
The central chemoreceptors provide the dominant, steady drive:
sensing the carbon dioxide indirectly through the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid,
they give the major, sensitive, near-linear response to carbon dioxide that holds
it constant minute to minute, but they respond relatively slowly and not to hypoxia.
The peripheral chemoreceptors complement this: sensing the arterial blood directly,
they respond rapidly — giving the fast component of the carbon-dioxide and acid
response and the breath-by-breath adjustment — and, uniquely,
they provide the hypoxic drive, a reserve that defends the oxygen when it falls
substantially.
The two interact synergistically, hypoxia steepening the carbon-dioxide response.
Together they form a control that is dominated by the central carbon-dioxide
response in health, with the rapid and hypoxic peripheral contributions in reserve.
So the central chemoreceptors give the dominant, steady,
sensitive but slow carbon-dioxide drive through cerebrospinal-fluid pH,
while the peripheral chemoreceptors add a rapid response and the unique hypoxic
drive, sensing arterial blood directly;
the two interacting synergistically and complementing each other to hold the carbon
dioxide constant while defending the oxygen — the integrated chemical control of
breathing.
Thank you. An excellent account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Chemical control holds the arterial CO2 remarkably constant by negative
feedback: central chemoreceptors give the major CO2 drive;
peripheral chemoreceptors (carotid > aortic bodies) give the rapid response and the
sole hypoxic drive — a rise in CO2 or fall in O2 increases ventilation.
Second, Central chemoreceptors (ventral medulla) sense the H+ concentration of the
CSF: CO2 crosses the blood-brain barrier freely and acidifies the poorly-buffered
CSF (so the response is sensitive),
while blood H+ crosses poorly — so they respond to CO2 indirectly via CSF pH,
not directly to blood acidity.
Third, Peripheral chemoreceptors are small,
highly vascular carotid/aortic bodies sensing arterial blood (afferents:
glossopharyngeal from carotid, vagus from aortic);
they respond to a fall in PaO2 (the sole hypoxic drive),
and also to raised CO2 and H+ and reduced flow.
Fourth, The CO2 response curve is steep and near-linear (ventilation vs PaCO2),
its slope = sensitivity, with an apnoeic threshold below which breathing ceases;
mediated mainly centrally, depressed by sleep/anaesthesia/opioids and by chronic
CO2 retention, potentiated by hypoxia.
The hypoxic response curve (ventilation vs PaO2) is hyperbolic — little response
until PaO2 falls below ~8 kPa (60 mmHg), then steep — a late,
emergency drive abolished by even subanaesthetic concentrations of anaesthetic.
Fifth, CO2 and O2 interact synergistically (more than additive),
largely at the peripheral chemoreceptors:
hypoxia steepens the CO2 response and hypercapnia/acidosis steepens the hypoxic
response — making the combined drive in asphyxia powerful.
Anaesthesia depresses both, especially the hypoxic drive.
Thank you. That concludes the station.